Fill in more of the practice section in final chapter (#53)
fhdsl/DataViz_Considerations: 07_wrapping_up.qmd

{{< include _example_iter5_adjust_points.qmd >}}

<div class = "accessibility">

> When using color to distinguish groups, to increase accessibility, use tools to check your color palette to see if the colors can be distinguished by those with color vision deficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using color to distinguish groups, to increase accessibility, use tools (such as this [simulator](https://www.color-blindness.com/coblis-color-blindness-simulator/)to check your color palette to see if the colors can be distinguished by those with color vision deficiency. Use  color pallets that were designed for color deficiency  such as [viridis in R](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/viridis/vignettes/intro-to-viridis.html) and [python](https://matplotlib.org/stable/users/explain/colors/colormaps.html).
```

Author: I was going to add a tip box when I wrote that section later today or tomorrow to point them to the section with that info. But if you'd like more info here, I can expand it

Author: I've referenced this suggestion in an issue to make sure I handle this improvement

Perhaps you'd like to try to plot this with a completely different plot type! Whatever your question -- go for it! Practice is one of the best ways to improve your data visualization skills.

## Keep Practicing!

With your data within your research projects, keep practicing thorough exploration prior to intentional and careful data visualization, making design choices to increase the clarity and accessibility of your visualizations for a wide audience.

> In addition, more open ended practice with open source datasets can be found by browsing data visualization communities and challenges such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, more open-ended practice with open source datasets can be found by browsing data visualization communities and challenges such as:
```

1. [Tidy Tuesday](https://github.com/rfordatascience/tidytuesday)

2. [Posit Plotnine challenges](https://github.com/has2k1/plotnine/discussions/categories/2024-plotnine-contest)

3. [bioviz challenges](http://biovis.net/2026/). Note that these bioviz challenges are more advanced, often describing working with complex multi-omic data and sometimes suggesting that participants should sketch possible visualizations rather than perfectly polishing expository visualization.

> As mentioned within the Field Specific Visualizations chapter, data visualization is commonly used within bioinformatics research to validate models. Researchers may wonder how well their model performs. To answer that question, they may run either experimental or simulated data with known "truth" through the model and compare the model's predictions with the known "truth". Researchers may then wonder why the model is messing up in spot where the prediction doesn't line up with the observed truth. To answer this, researchers explore specific examples where the known truth and predictions differ and look for patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned within the Field Specific Visualizations chapter, data visualization is commonly used within bioinformatics research to validate models. Researchers may wonder how well their model performs. To answer that question, they may run either experimental or simulated data with known "truth" through the model and compare the model's predictions with the known "truth". Researchers may then wonder why the model is messing up for a prediction that doesn't line up with the observed truth. To answer this, researchers explore specific examples where the known truth and predictions differ and look for patterns.
```

Two examples of using data visualization to validate models within the bioinformatic literature include:

> 1. A model (`Xpresso`) which predicts gene expression from gene sequence [@Agarwal_Shendure_2020]. The authors ran the model using sequences of genes with experimentally known expression values and compared the model predictions with the known / observed expression. Figure 3A is an example of this comparison / validation. Other subpanels within the figure explore where the predictions diverge from the observed expression. The authors [provide the data related to this figure](https://www.cell.com/cms/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107663/attachment/8f2732a1-4b4d-4c39-aae6-5742b2b946af/mmc2.xlsx). Consider recreating Figure 3A or rethink an entirely  different or partially different approach for comparing the predictions and the observed expression values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A model (`Xpresso`) which predicts gene expression from gene sequence [@Agarwal_Shendure_2020]. The authors ran the model using sequences of genes with experimentally known expression values and compared the model predictions with the known / observed expression. Figure 3A is an example of this comparison / validation. Other subpanels within the figure explore where the predictions diverge from the observed expression. The authors [provide the data related to this figure](https://www.cell.com/cms/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107663/attachment/8f2732a1-4b4d-4c39-aae6-5742b2b946af/mmc2.xlsx). Consider recreating Figure 3A or rethink an entirely different or partially different approach for comparing the predictions and the observed expression values.
```

> 2. A model (`rhapsodi`) was designed to impute the missing genotypes within sparse single gamete DNA sequencing data [@Carioscia_etal_2022]. As a result of imputing the missing genotypes, the donor haplotypes are phased and recombination break points are discovered. Benchmarking of the model's performance was done using simulated data. Specifically the authors simulated fully known genotype sequences for many gametes from donor haplotypes (keeping track of recombination locations). Then sparsity was introduced through further simulation into these genotype sequences. The model was provided the simulated sparse inputs and the model outputs could be compared with the fully known simulated data. Figure 2 illustrates much of this benchmarking with Figure 2—figure supplement 5 focusing on looking for patterns where truth and predictions differed, specifically for the recombination break points. The [data used to produce that figure is available on the associated GitHub](https://github.com/mccoy-lab/transmission-distortion/blob/main/plotting/supp_recomb/fn_fp_tall_df.Rdata). Consider exploring the dataset to look for patterns much like the supplemental figure did.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. A model (`rhapsodi`) was designed to impute the missing genotypes within sparse single gamete DNA sequencing data [@Carioscia_etal_2022]. As a result of imputing the missing genotypes, the donor haplotypes are phased and recombination break points are discovered. Benchmarking of the model's performance was done using simulated data. Specifically the authors simulated fully known genotype sequences for many gametes from donor haplotypes (keeping track of recombination locations). Then sparsity was introduced through further simulation into these genotype sequences. The model was provided the simulated sparse inputs and the model outputs could be compared with the fully known simulated data. Figure 2 illustrates much of this benchmarking with Figure 2—figure supplement 5 focusing on looking for patterns where truth and predictions differed, specifically for the recombination break points. The [data used to produce that figure is available on the associated GitHub repository](https://github.com/mccoy-lab/transmission-distortion/blob/main/plotting/supp_recomb/fn_fp_tall_df.Rdata). Consider exploring the dataset to look for patterns much like the supplemental figure did.
```

## In Summary

* Aim for understanding and readability for a broad audience over complexity.
* When you are working with your data and selecting your plot, think about what message you want to communicate.
* Iterate and ask for feedback.
* Carefully check visualizations against data and expectations to ensure accuracy.
* Be careful to avoid common data distortions or unintentional takeaways.

## Checklist

> This checklist contains reminders of considerations and steps you should take while building your expository data visualization in order to minimize its complexity, enhance its clarity and accessibility, and assess its accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This checklist contains reminders of considerations and steps you should take while building your expository data visualization in order to minimize complexity, enhance clarity, and improve accessibility, as well as assess accuracy.
```
